README.rst, before:

===============================================================
Reynir: A fast, efficient natural language parser for Icelandic
===============================================================

********
Overview
********

**Reynir** is a Python 3.x package for **parsing Icelandic text into sentence trees**.
The trees can then be used to extract information from the text, for instance
about people, titles, entities, facts, actions and opinions.

Along the way, Reynir tokenizes the text, finds **lemmas** and assigns
**part-of-speech (POS) tags** to every word.

Full documentation for Reynir is `available here <https://greynir.is/doc/>`_.

*******
Example
*******

>>> from reynir import Reynir
>>> r = Reynir()
>>> job = r.submit("Ása sá sól.")
>>> sent = next(job.sentences())
>>> sent.parse()
True
>>> print(sent.tree.view)
P                             # Root
+-S-MAIN                      # Main sentence
  +-IP                        # Inflected phrase
    +-NP-SUBJ                 # Noun phrase, subject
      +-no_et_nf_kvk: 'Ása'   # Noun, singular, nominative, feminine
    +-VP                      # Verb phrase
      +-so_1_þf_et_p3: 'sá'   # Verb, 1 accusative arg, singular, 3rd p
      +-NP-OBJ                # Noun phrase, object
        +-no_et_þf_kvk: 'sól' # Noun, singular, accusative, feminine
+-'.'                         # Punctuation
>>> sent.tree.nouns
['Ása', 'sól']
>>> sent.tree.verbs
['sjá']
>>> sent.tree.flat
'P S-MAIN IP NP-SUBJ no_et_nf_kvk /NP-SUBJ VP so_1_þf_et_p3 NP-OBJ no_et_þf_kvk /NP-OBJ /VP /IP /S-MAIN p /P'
>>> sent.tree.S.IP.NP_SUBJ.lemmas # The subject noun phrase (S.IP.NP also works)
['Ása']
>>> sent.tree.S.IP.VP.lemmas # The verb phrase
['sjá', 'sól']
>>> sent.tree.S.IP.VP.NP_OBJ.lemmas # The object within the verb phrase (S.IP.VP.NP also works)
['sól']

*************
Prerequisites
*************

This package runs on CPython 3.4 or newer, and on PyPy 3.5 or newer.

You may need to have ``python3-dev`` and/or potentially ``python3.6-dev`` installed on your system
to set up Reynir successfully::

    # Debian or Ubuntu:
    sudo apt-get install python3-dev
    sudo apt-get install python3.6-dev

************
Installation
************

To install this package::

    $ pip3 install reynir

If you want to be able to edit the source, do like so (assuming you have **git** installed)::

    $ git clone https://github.com/vthorsteinsson/ReynirPackage
    $ cd ReynirPackage
    $ python setup.py develop

The package source code is now in ``ReynirPackage/src/reynir``.

*************
Documentation
*************

Please consult `Reynir's documentation <https://greynir.is/doc/>`_ for detailed
`installation instructions <https://greynir.is/doc/installation.html>`_,
a `quickstart guide <https://greynir.is/doc/quickstart.html>`_,
and `reference information <https://greynir.is/doc/reference.html>`_,
as well as important information
about `copyright and licensing <https://greynir.is/doc/copyright.html>`_.

Commit message:

Added info about running tests to README.rst

README.rst, after:

===============================================================
Reynir: A fast, efficient natural language parser for Icelandic
===============================================================

********
Overview
********

**Reynir** is a Python 3.x package for **parsing Icelandic text into sentence trees**.
The trees can then be used to extract information from the text, for instance
about people, titles, entities, facts, actions and opinions.

Along the way, Reynir tokenizes the text, finds **lemmas** and assigns
**part-of-speech (POS) tags** to every word.

Full documentation for Reynir is `available here <https://greynir.is/doc/>`_.

*******
Example
*******

>>> from reynir import Reynir
>>> r = Reynir()
>>> job = r.submit("Ása sá sól.")
>>> sent = next(job.sentences())
>>> sent.parse()
True
>>> print(sent.tree.view)
P                             # Root
+-S-MAIN                      # Main sentence
  +-IP                        # Inflected phrase
    +-NP-SUBJ                 # Noun phrase, subject
      +-no_et_nf_kvk: 'Ása'   # Noun, singular, nominative, feminine
    +-VP                      # Verb phrase
      +-so_1_þf_et_p3: 'sá'   # Verb, 1 accusative arg, singular, 3rd p
      +-NP-OBJ                # Noun phrase, object
        +-no_et_þf_kvk: 'sól' # Noun, singular, accusative, feminine
+-'.'                         # Punctuation
>>> sent.tree.nouns
['Ása', 'sól']
>>> sent.tree.verbs
['sjá']
>>> sent.tree.flat
'P S-MAIN IP NP-SUBJ no_et_nf_kvk /NP-SUBJ VP so_1_þf_et_p3 NP-OBJ no_et_þf_kvk /NP-OBJ /VP /IP /S-MAIN p /P'
>>> sent.tree.S.IP.NP_SUBJ.lemmas # The subject noun phrase (S.IP.NP also works)
['Ása']
>>> sent.tree.S.IP.VP.lemmas # The verb phrase
['sjá', 'sól']
>>> sent.tree.S.IP.VP.NP_OBJ.lemmas # The object within the verb phrase (S.IP.VP.NP also works)
['sól']

*************
Prerequisites
*************

This package runs on CPython 3.4 or newer, and on PyPy 3.5 or newer.

You may need to have ``python3-dev`` and/or potentially ``python3.6-dev`` installed on your system
to set up Reynir successfully::

    # Debian or Ubuntu:
    sudo apt-get install python3-dev
    sudo apt-get install python3.6-dev

************
Installation
************

To install this package::

    $ pip3 install reynir

If you want to be able to edit the source, do like so (assuming you have **git** installed)::

    $ git clone https://github.com/vthorsteinsson/ReynirPackage
    $ cd ReynirPackage
    $ # [ Activate your virtualenv here if you have one ]
    $ python setup.py develop

The package source code is now in ``ReynirPackage/src/reynir``.

*****
Tests
*****

To run the built-in tests, install `pytest <https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/>`_, ``cd`` to your
``ReynirPackage`` subdirectory (and optionally activate your virtualenv), then run::

    $ python -m pytest

*************
Documentation
*************

Please consult `Reynir's documentation <https://greynir.is/doc/>`_ for detailed
`installation instructions <https://greynir.is/doc/installation.html>`_,
a `quickstart guide <https://greynir.is/doc/quickstart.html>`_,
and `reference information <https://greynir.is/doc/reference.html>`_,
as well as important information
about `copyright and licensing <https://greynir.is/doc/copyright.html>`_.
